---
date: "2021-10-23"
tags: ["General"]
title: "Foundations"
toc: false
draft: false
---


## Intro

Foundations are important whatever you do. That was said by many. So why I'm
writing about that? It's because I'm worried about foundations situation in IT
world.

Foundations are by definition important, because all things built in given
space dependents on it. I'll try to describe why that matters in examples of
fields that I'm interested in.

I'll say it at least twice - there is no shame to back to basics even on senior
level of experience. Most of your practice should be focused on the
foundations.


## Maths

As my topology tutor, [Stefan
Jackowski](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stefan_Jackowski), said _mathematics
is brutally hierarchical and there is no way around this_ which is another
phrase for Euclid quote _there is no royal road to geometry_.

Foundations in maths are inevitable. It's very hard to do mathematics without
firm grasp of basics. It is even visible in middle school. If a pupil skip one
or two topics there is a great chance that he or she will have troubles with
next topics. That stays true on academic level too. In my opinion this is the
reason why most people finds mathematics relatively hard.

In Maths things are literally built on top of the axioms. There is nothing
outside axioms and its consequences. Therefore foundations are written into it.
There is very low probability that one can perform proofs and even read
maths without confident knowledge of the foundations.


## Calisthenics

Another field I'm interested in is calisthenics. Anyone who starts calisthenics
and sees classics like
[planche](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planche_(exercise)) obviously want to
be able to do it. One might try to practice this exercise right away but
without establish strong foundations it's nearly impossible.

In this case is not as rigid as in case of maths. One physically can try
practice hard exercise. It will be just inefficient but not impossible.

In order to practice efficiently one must keep the foundations strong. They
(push ups, pull ups, dips and squats) might sound very boring in comparison to
planche or front lever but it is crucial to keep it strong with the perfect form.


## IT


## Summary


