---
date: "2022-12-30"
tags: ["Annual Summary"]
title: "Summary of 2022"
toc: true
draft: false
---

## Continuation of 2021 highlights

As the first highlight of year 2022 I wanted to mention the continuation of most
of habits that I've started in 2021. I'm still jog regularly. I tried to
learn Russian somehow regularly over the year. I had some breaks but generally I
learned a bit and didn't forget what I've learned in 2021. I still do pull ups
and chin ups on daily basis. I've run three (3km, 6km and 6km)
[Runmageddons](https://www.runmageddon.pl) in 2022! There are plans for going
for 12km in 2023. I'm also still amazed by quality of my Macbook Air M1, after
almost two years now. Battery still can make over 10 hours of work on single
charging. The last one is not a habit, but I wanted to mention it here.


## I've left Allegro Pay and joined TCL

In August 2021 I've left Allegro Pay and joined
[TCL](https://www.tcl.com/global/en) Research Europe. Regarding my time in
Allegro I've wrote up [a summary](https://dskrzypiec.dev/allegropay/).

I've joined TCL Research to maintain and expand their Overseas Big Data
Platform. It's very interesting experience so far. Most of services are deployed
on AWS or Alibaba Cloud. Whole infrastructure is defined as a code within AWS
CDK and is developed by data engineers and not DevOps. Also here for the first
time I started using Scala and Spark (via AWS Glue jobs). It was definitely a
good experience. I immediately liked both Scala and writing data transformation
using Spark. Using those technologies we've implemented end-to-end and
integration tests for most of significant part of the platform, including
dynamically deploying dedicated infrastructure. Many new technologies and all
embedded in AWS. Very interesting so far indeed!

In TCL we also primarily speaks in English. It was a good change after working
for last two years in Polish-speaking teams. I see clear improvement of my English
pronunciation and speaking in general after a few months.


## Using carbon steel wok

Around July-August this year I've got my first carbon steel wok. Till that point
I've owned and used only Teflon-coated nonstick pans. Initially I had to scrub
and season the wok. It was a bit difficult at first, because I was using
induction stove. Over time I've improved it using actual fire.

The difference between Teflon nonstick pans and carbon steel wok is huge! Wok is
getting hot faster and reaches higher temperature overall. After using it for
some time, now Teflon pans feels like it doesn't heat at all. Because of those
characteristics cooking with carbon steel wok require different technique.
Usually food is fried faster and needs to be stir-fried with constant moving
food around the wok. Vegetables prepared with wok have unique texture. They are
cooked well close to outside but kind of fresh inside. For me this is ideal.

Deep frying is much better in wok, then in other pans. I think it's because of
much higher temperature of oil. Food seems to not absorb oil at all!

Using wok enhanced my cooking. I cook basically daily now. Preparing lunch with
wok is 20 minutes total, including preparing ingredients. Now I like to cook
my food by myself more then ordering a take-out.


## I turned thirty

This year I turned thirty. It wasn't any special really. My only goal for
entering my thirties was to be in better physical shape, then in all years in my
twenties. I definitely accomplish that.


## Getting back to table tennis

After few years I've get back to training table tennis again. I wasn't a pro
player but I enjoy it. It's good to join regular trainings again. It's both
super fun and quite an exercise.


## Improved my knife sharpening skills

Over the last few years I've been sharpening my knives on whetstone but quality
of those tries wasn't very much stable. I couldn't get consistent and sharp
results every time. I thought it was because of my whetstone quality or
incorrect gradation. After I've watched
[Burrfection](https://www.youtube.com/@Burrfection) has sharpen a knife on a
[brick (!)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qoEZI82-M_k) I've got convinced that
the most important is a technique. I adjusted my technique afterwards and
started practice more often. Currently I'm getting definitely better, regarding
sharpness, and more consistent results. I'm very glad that I've improved this
skill.


## Home App rewritten and moved online

In November I've [rewritten Home App in Go](https://dskrzypiec.dev/home-app-go/)
and moved it online. I'm very satisfied with this decision and final result.
If you're interested in details, please follow the link.


## AWS Certification

A week before Christmas I've received my first AWS certificate - Solutions
Architect Associate (SAA-C03). Learning for the exam was for sure a fruitful
experience. I've better high level picture of AWS. I also strengthen my
foundations and get know many details I didn't know before.

I general I'm still not really a fan of certification but I have to admit that
AWS exams have pretty high level and contains actual real-life scenarios
regarding system design in the cloud.


## Summary

In summary I think year 2022 was pretty good year for me. I've improved my
professional skills regarding AWS and cloud in general. In hobby area in this
year I focus on cooking and exercising. I improved my pizza making skill. I made
croissants. I started using carbon steel wok. I learned a bunch of rice and rice
cookers. Now I'm looking forward to 2023!

