---
date: "2021-07-12"
tags: ["personal"]
title: "Leaving PwC"
toc: false
draft: true
---


## Intro

After **six and a half** (6.5) years I'm leaving PwC. In this post I wanted to
shortly described my history in PwC and perhaps expose what is like to work in
consulting.


## Joining PwC

I've been interviewed to PwC in December 2014 for position somewhere between
intern and first year consultant. At that time I was studying on the first year
of my masters degree. I've started since February 2015 because I've had exams
in January at the uni.

Initially I was recruited to a new team in PwC - Data Analytics which suppose
to be first tech team with programmers and analysts. At that time the team had
about 8 people.

After few weeks I joined my first big project. In general we had to built
credit risk models complaint with new regulation -
[IFRS 9](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IFRS_9) for one of biggest Polish banks.
This project was done with cooperation with Financial Risk Management (FRM)
team. The project was very long in PwC terms - over 3 years. Somewhere in
between my team has changed and I become member of FRM team. The wording is
intentional. I wasn't aware of this change for quite some time.


## Fresh consultant

One of the biggest advantage of working in consulting is that you can work with
many different domains, problems and technologies without changing your job. I
have a funny example for this. Around July or August 2015 I was asked by my
manager "Hey Damian, do you want to fly to London for a week to make some
dashboards in Tableau? The flight is on Monday.". The question was asked on
Thursday, prior to that Monday. I answered "Sure but I don't know Tableau". He
answered "Tableau is easy and you got Friday and whole weekend!". So I've
flown together with an intern and another consultant. Without any manager or
any experienced colleague. It was unexpected for me. The whole situation was
unreal for me. We've got a credit card and few days later we had to work for the
client in London using completely new tools and be confident and professional.
Fortunately Tableau was rather easy and we fairly knew SQL so we managed to do
the job.

But usually I worked from office in Warsaw on local projects or foreign
projects also from local office. During my first two years in PwC, as
consultant, I mostly did data analysis with T-SQL, R and Excel. Including data
validation, data preparation and everything around data that will lead to
building models and simulations. In technical perspective that was around 60%
T-SQL, 20% Excel and 20% R.
Because of many reasons very large part of writing calculations and simulations
for building a model was done in T-SQL. It is not the best tool for the job but
that was the way, but we didn't know it back then. Nevertheless it was a good
practice to me to write such complex algorithms in SQL, not even a programming
language!

There was one quick project somewhere in 2016 which had a big impact on me. It
was some simulation optimization to reduce execution time from 6-8 hours to
hopefully minutes. I was asked to rewrite part of solution (2-3 algorithms)
from T-SQL to C#. The methodology was fairly familiar to me but I didn't
produce any commercial code in C# before. The main idea was to rewrite T-SQL to
C# and add it as C# assembly to SQL Server in form of stored procedures.
Therefore interface for the client was the same but implementation was done in
another technology. I've learned a lot on this 3-week project. I started from
writing loading data from the database and write many many unit tests (we had
to produce identical results as T-SQL version). I very much enjoyed coding in
C# even though it was a new thing for me. The deadline was close and as it
turned out the other dev didn't make much of a progress. I finished my part 3
days before the deadline. At this point leading dev asked me to take over the
other part of the implementation. We worked 9 hours on Saturday and from 11am
on Sunday to 7am on Monday without any break. We finished implementation about
6am on Monday and thanks to unit tests we were pretty sure it was correct
around 7am. Around 8am I went to sleep and lead dev have to go the bank to
present and to deliver our solution. Rewritten implementation with parallel
simulation in C# in the end took only few minutes to produce the result. After
this project I though that this the thing I want to do. Implementation in
statically typed and compiled language was luxury for me a that time.


## Rough times


## Consulting phenomena


## Focus on technology


## Transfer to Data Tools team


## Summary

